Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricard Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Robert mckennon. He is senior lecturer
in Philosophy at the University of Liverpool. And today
we're talking about his book, Non Ideal Epistemology. So
Robin, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to
everyone.
Yeah, nice to be here. So I noticed that
you've actually covered this confusion in your intro, Ricardo,
you call me Robert first and then Robin, this
is a constant problem. My official legal name is
Robert, but everyone calls me Robin. I publish under
Robin, but my university refuses to call me Robin.
I have to be Robert and all the official
system. So, yeah, as I said, endless cause of
confusion um throughout my entire life.
OK. So let's get into it then. So we're
talking about epistemology today and particularly about non ideal
epistemology. But I guess that before we get into
what non ideal epistemology is, we should talk a
little bit more broadly about what epistemology usually do
and what ideal theory, the opposite of non ideal
really is. So let's start with that. W what
kinds of what are the the most common approaches
in epistemology and uh how do epistemology usually approach
questions?
Yeah, that's a good question. I mean, I know
that if you go online, you find all sorts
of kind of nice, simple definitions of epistemology. Like
for example, it's the theory of knowledge or, or
the ethics of belief or something like that. But
the thing that really impresses me as someone who
works in epistemology is that epistemology do lots of
different things and they ask lots of different kinds
of questions. So some epistemology ask what you might
call or like what is questions like what is
knowledge, what is evidence, what is justified belief? Um
A lot of the time to answer them, they
kind of do conceptual analysis, the kind of traditional
method of philosophy if you like, but you don't
have to do that. You can answer those questions
using different kinds of methods. Um Those aren't the
kinds of kinds of questions I'm particularly interested in,
at least in the book anyway, perhaps another moods
of interested in them but not in the book.
I'm more interested in kind of broadly normative questions
about knowledge, but also about belief, questions such as
how should I go about foreign belief, but also
questions like how should I go about gathering evidence?
I guess most broadly, how should I go about
conducting my inquiries and then a couple that as
many other epistemology do with interest in social dimensions
of inquiry. So most inquiries are not just you
by yourself, it's you with your friends or your
colleagues, you're getting information from a wide range of
sources. So the question isn't so much, how should
I inquire? It's rather how should we inquire together?
Um So those are the sorts of personal questions
that I'm interested in these sort of social questions
about how to conduct inquiries. So you asked about
ideal theory in epistemology and what that is. So
one reason why I like putting it in terms
of these broad normative questions is that you can
then distinguish between two different kinds of approach to
them. So one kind of approach and this is
the Ideal Theory approach I would say is you
sort of, I don't know, this is maybe a
bit of a caricature, but it's not too much
of a caricature, you could have sit there and
you think, well, what would a really good inquiry
look like? What sorts of things would our good
inquirers do? Um How would they go about gathering
information on the assumption that lots of the information
that's out there is kind of good quality. How
would they share information on the assumption that they're
not going to be lying to each other all
the time? Um So you're kind of answering these
normative questions about inquiry, communal inquiry in a way
that's in a kind of obvious sense idealized. Um
If you like, you're kind of constructing a model
of what a kind of idealized community of Inquirers
would look like. And when you start to talk
about norms of inquiry, these are things that your
idealized Inquirers would do. The idea then being that,
you know, we're not idealized Inquirer, we've got all
sorts of perfections. But what we should do is
if you like, try to emulate this idealized community
of Inquirers and I guess the better the job
we do of emulating that idealized community, the better
we're doing. So that's the Ideal Theory approach. That's
not as the title of my book suggests. That's
not the approach I favor I favor the non
ideal approach where instead of constructing this idealized model,
we look at actual inquiries. So here, of course,
scientific inquiries are a natural place to look. We
want to look at how actual inquiries work. We
want to defy the actual inquiries that seem to
be getting something right? Uh They seem to be
productive across a few different dimensions. And let me
try to figure out well, what exactly is it
about those inquiries that enable them to work? What
are they doing? It could be that as it
turns out what our actual inquirer uh do in
these well functioning inquiries is quite different from what
the uh idealized inquirers do. So, for example, and
men will have this view, it might turn out
that a degree of dogmatism and closed mindedness is
actually a kind of essential ingredient of successful scientific
inquiry, obviously, you want to be limits on this.
But it may well be the case that um
good scientific Inquirer are rather more dogmatic than the
more idealized versions would be. That's just one example.
But that's kind of basic idea. You can, if
you look at how things actually work and from
that, you try to get a sense of what
sorts of things we should do given the limitations
of the situations which we find ourselves.
This is actually very interesting because I mean, shouldn't
all epistemology from the very beginning be non ideal
in the sense that it should realistically look at
how actual people uh approach questions in epistemology, how
actual people work cognitively and so on be because
I mean, isn't it a bit? Um uh I
don't know, I don't even know the exact word
to use here, but idealizing something and expecting people
to work in a particular idealized way, isn't it?
Isn't it a little bit uh unrealistic?
Well, obviously, I'm sympathetic to what I think is
behind the question. Um But I guess maybe what
I should say is that um how to put
this the point of my book and the kind
of criticism I want to make of what I
was earlier calling ideal theory is not that there
are no conceivable reasons for which you might adopt
this sort of approach. So for example, one very
popular subfield and contemporary epistemology is formal epistemology So
what former Teos are doing essentially is they're constructing
very idealized models of inquirers. These inquirers have got
properties such as logical, logical omniscient. So they can,
they see all the logical consequences of their beliefs
and they endorse those consequences. Obviously, people aren't like
that. You know, you might think, why would you
do this as you put it? This is very
unrealistic. But as it turns out, formal epistemology has
been influential in a wide range of fields outside
of philosophy. So it seems that non philosophers are
very much interested in the sorts of work that
formal epistemology do. I mean, one way of thinking
about this perhaps would be, you know, fields like
artificial intelligence and robotics, you're trying to construct agents,
you have to kind of give them rules for
how to go about doing things it seems like
here you might be actually interested in trying to
figure out what would be good rules for someone
to try and follow. I'm not sure if that's
the best example of what I have in mind,
but hopefully the audience gets the idea um this
sort of form of work, even though it's not
realistic as a model of human beings. Um Well,
it's not meant to be, that's not what it
is, it's not trying to be a model of
human beings that is doing something else kind of
roughly analogous, I guess to the way in which
things like logic, right? So logic isn't meant to
be a model of how human beings reason. Um
If you take it that way, it's very, it's
a very bad model, but that's not what logic
is. A logic of course, has got all sorts
of very important practical um uses. So the critique
of Ideal theory in epistemology is not that it
has no point. The critique is rather more precise
than that. Roughly speaking, the critique is epistemology, justs
increasingly are turning their attention to real world problems,
often real world political problems, but sometimes just more
broadly social problems. And they want to use the
tool of epistemology to say something about those problems.
In some cases, one gets the impression they think
that we can use the tools of epistemology to
actually put forward sensible solutions to these problems. That's
where this tendency towards idealization becomes a problem because
now you're addressing an actual problem faced by actual
human beings. But if you're using these tools that
embed all sorts of idealized assumptions, then it's not
particularly surprising if it turns out that, that those
solutions aren't really particularly fitting to the actual problems
people face. Um And part of the reason you
might think, well, why would anyone do this? Right?
Like why would anyone get confused and think that
um these idealized models have got um practical application?
Well, part of the reason for this is that
the way put it earlier was the ideal theory
and non ideal theory are kind of two diametrically
opposed things, but that's not quite right, of course.
So you can have think about it as kind
of a continuum, right. So one end, you've got
the most idealized ideal theory at the other end,
but the least idealized the most non ideal theory.
Um THE actual epistemology with actual views will be
located somewhere along this continuum. I would say that
kind of the dominant trend in my kind of
epistemology and the epistemology is more towards the idealized
side. But there is a recognition of certain human
limitations and the critique in the book is that
the problem becomes, once you start to recognize certain
limitations, you can kind of lose track of the
fact that actually you're ignoring other limitations. Um So
you end up kind of in a sense confused
about just how ideal your approach is. Um IT
is less than fully ideal perhaps, but um it
is idealized in ways that cause problems given the
sorts of uses to which you want to be
your theory. That wasn't too cryptic.
No, no, not at all. Thank you for that
clarification. And really to, to point that you made
there in the book, you talk about non ideal
epistemology as being explicitly ethical and political. Could you
explain that point? What
I'm trying to think what exactly you're picking up
on in the book? Um Well, there's, there's a
clear sense in which no idea ology is explicitly
ethical and political, which is that I think that
once you are approaching things in this non ideal
way, um It's very difficult to put down a
kind of clear distinction between epistemological and say ethical
or political questions. Um But if you work at
a higher level of distraction, you can sort of
try and preserve this, this night, this nice, neat
distinction. Um So that's one way in which I
think um it's explicitly ethical and political. So one
topic I discuss in the book, for example, is
um science denial, in particular climate change denial. Um
So I'm interested in the epistemology of science denial.
So this is as I see it an inquiry
in epistemology. But of course, this has got a
political dimension because I'm talking about climate change skepticism
and that's connected up with all these big political
questions. So there's just as I see it, no
way of doing the epistemology of science denial that
is not also to do some kind of ethics
or political philosophy. Um So perhaps that's what I
had in mind in the passage you're you're referring
to
uh and also you're interested in feminist epistemology and
it's also something that you talk about in the
book. And so how does non ideal epistemology relate
to feminist epistemology?
Good. Yeah. So I guess I should give me
the opportunity to expand on what I said in
response to your previous question about Non Ideal epistemology
as explicitly ethical and political. So one way of
characterizing feminist epistemology is that it is an approach
to recognizably piston question. So questions about knowledge, the
nature of knowledge, for example, that is informed by
feminist concerns and of course, feminist concerns are ethical
and political concerns. Um BUT it's still an approach
to ethology. So a feminist emo for example, is
still interested in a question such as how we
should go about forming beliefs or a question such
as how we should go about conducting inquiries. But
they see that question as as relevant to the
their feminist political concerns. So for example, when a
feminist pasmo just takes a look at science, they
might ask questions such as well. Why is it
that so much scientific inquiry seems to ignore questions
of gender. Why is it that it seems like
when you look at certain fields such as evolutionary
psychology, there are certain assumptions but male dominance that
seem to be unquestioned within the fields, perhaps we
should question those assumptions. So feminist psalmists are asking
epistemological questions but with these kind of political and
ethical concerns in the background. So now to go
back to your question, Ricardo about how this all
relates to non ideal epistemology. So the way in
which I put it in the book and I
guess I stand by this is that feminist ology
is a kind of non idea epistemology. So feminist
cosmologists are doing non idea epistemology. I think they've
done some of the best non idealist, which is
why I draw on feminist so much in the
book. But you can do non idea epistemology without
having these sorts of feminist concerns in the foreground,
so to speak. So I thought to say you're
doing kind of anti feminist ethology. It's just that
that's maybe not the sorts of considerations you are
focusing on. So for example, to go back to
the earlier example, perhaps you could bring a kind
of feminist dimension to your analysis of science denial.
But that's kind of optional as it were. Um
YOU might be thinking about a phenomenon such as
science denial in just a different way. Um As
I said earlier in the book, I'm doing something
like the epistemology of science denial. And that just
doesn't seem to me to be a kind of
feminist system. Um So yeah, that would mean no,
the epistemology is if like a broader category than
feminist ology. So feminist p would be a kind
of species of non idea, perhaps a particularly interesting
species but still just a species. Then there's kind
of other ways of doing non ideal epistemology. That
wouldn't be obviously feminist,
please correct me if I'm wrong. But I guess
that some of the things that you mentioned there
regarding feminist epistemology apply more broadly to uh non
ideal epistemology. And as you said, feminist epistemology, you
look at it as a form of non ideal
epistemology. But in the sense that for uh it
looks at epistemic agents as situated in a particular
social, cultural, perhaps political and environment, right? For example,
you mentioned the fact that feminist uh feminist epistemology
sometimes look at scientific inquiry in certain disciplines. And
for example, they notice that the scientists many times
come to the table, come to the table with
certain uh assumptions that then drive the way they
produce science or the way they formulate hypothesis to
be tested, for example, certain assumptions about uh sex
or gender differences and where they come from and
then that has an impact on the production of
science, how they evaluate evidence and so on. So
I is that uh right, I mean, am I
right in pointing that out or?
Yes, certainly. So. So on the official sort of
uh account in the book, Non Ideal Epistemology means
an approach to these normative questions I was mentioning
earlier that involves several different dimensions of non ideality,
so to speak. And one of those dimensions is
a recognition of the extent to which actual inquirers
are socially situated. So that means that they've got
the various markers of social identity, right? So they've
got a gender, a race, a class and so
on. But then obviously a whole bunch of other
things besides, right. So they've got a job, a
scientist, for example, um they're embedded within a particular
community which has implications for the sorts of information
sources they have available. All these sorts of things
have to be taken into account. Um So kind
of one nice way of putting the sense in
which feminist epistemology is almost by definition, a version
of non ideal epistemology is precisely that in feminist
Phal, uh it's kind of definitional that it is
based on a recognition of the social situation this,
of, of no, and in particular, the fact that
everyone has got a gender identity and that kind
of informs the way in which they might look
at the world in all sorts of ways, not
necessarily in a kind of crude way. You know,
the idea is not, there's like a male way
of looking at the world and a female way
of looking at the world. That's you can find
that idea in older writings and feminist pathology, but
that's not the more modern idea. The more modern
idea is just the kind of to me obvious
fact that who you are has an implication has
implications, sorry for, for how you look at the
world and therefore is something that can't be ignored
if you are asking certain epistemological questions. I mean,
to me, it just seems obviously true. So to
that sense, in that sense, I can't really see
why you would disagree with the basic idea behind
feminist pathology.
So let's get into some specific issues problems that
you deal with in the book related to Non
Ideal Epistemology and uh how they play out in
non ideal epistemology. So uh one of the issues
you address there is the problem of the identification
of expertise. So what is this problem? And how
would it play out in non ideal epistemology?
Yeah, good. This is an interesting problem because it's
well interesting because it's, it's an interesting problem, both,
both as a theatrical problem and also as a
kind of like more practical or applied problem. So
the theoretical problem is just that um unless we
assume that all experts agree about everything, there are
always going to be situations where different experts say
different things. So for example, one person says that
the um a good diet is one that is
high in protein. Another expert says that a good
diet is one that is high in fat, for
example. So two medical experts saying different things. Um
So the question becomes well, how are you as
someone who is not an expert in the relevant
subject? In this case, uh Nutrition, how are you
meant to um decide who to listen to? And
you can formulate this is kind of abstract philosophical
problem. You can say lots of interesting things about
it. Um So the work you can kind of
do and this is an abstract problem I think
is independently um worth worth doing that said I'm
not really interested in the abstract problem I'm interested
in. If you like kind of the form the
abstract problem takes in actual environments where it's not
that you're kind of sitting there as a uninformed
layperson without any kind of inclination towards one side
rather than the other. No, often you've got an
inclination towards one side. So for example, um I
don't know, you've been brought up being told that
um uh fatty foods are bad for you. Uh
So when you come kind of come across this
sort of disagreement between these two experts, your inclinations
automatically side with the doctor who is saying that
you should avoid fat. Um But of course, you
know, that should lead you to kind of interrogate
your prior inclinations. Um You might want to ask,
where did they come from? Am I terribly well
informed? Perhaps I've been misinformed. So that just makes
the problem even more difficult because it's not just
that from a kind of abstract, rational perspective, it's
not obvious how you should decide the issue. Um
You've also got to reckon with the fact that,
you know, you're not impartial, you're not an impartial
observer. And um but then how do you go
about questioning your kind of inclinations towards one side
rather than the other? It doesn't really seem obvious
how you go about doing that. And that to
me seems like a kind of difficult problem. So
of course, the example I've given perhaps isn't the
most, isn't the best one for making the political
dimensions of the problem salient. So just replace this
with a different example. Um You've got one doctor
saying that uh wearing masks uh is going to
protect you against uh let's imagine a brand new
pandemic. So not COVID but a new one in
10 years time. Another doctor saying that they won't
um you've got inclinations one with other. Perhaps you
think, you know, masking is uh is fine or
perhaps you think it's, it's not, it's not so
good that's going to color how you interpret this
expert disagreement. But of course, you know, you should
be kind of questioning the interpretation that you give
to the disagreement, not just Lynn leaves you, I
would say in, in a very difficult situation.
Uh And so I guess that at least to
some extent associated with that, uh there's also uh
the idea of intellectual autonomy and the uh the
reason why I'm bringing that up now is that
many times, uh I mean, relying on experts, people
pitted against intellectual autonomy against the idea of to
put it in simpler terms, thinking for yourself instead
of relying on the intellectual or the epistemic work
of others in this case, experts. So to what
extent should we have it according to this non
ideal epistemological approach?
So, so there's a view I think probably I
defend in the book that I know have come
to think is a little bit too strong. So
what I'll do is I'll see what the view
was in the book and then maybe explain why.
Now I think it's a little bit too strong
alone, its essentials, I think still. Right. So, the
view in the book, I think, or at least
one could justifiably get the impression from the book
from the book that I think that, um, intellectual
autonomy would be nice, but we can't really have
it. And in so far as we can try
to have it, it's often going to make things
worse. So, what do you mean by that? Well,
let's go back to my example where you're trying
to decide between, I don't know, the pro masking
doctor and the anti masking doctor. Um So someone
who wants to kind of focus on the importance
of intellectual autonomy is going to say, well, sure,
you're going to end up in this very difficult
situation where you almost have to kind of question
your assumptions before you can start to decide what
to listen to, but still you should try and
do that, right? So you should try and sort
through the issue for yourself. Perhaps you should go
and read a bunch of um uh medical literature.
Um You should talk to people, you should really
try to uh come to your own view uh
about the, the matter in question. Um So that's
what the defender of intellectual autonomy would say in
the book. What I essentially say is that um
that's not going to work out very well. Um
Essentially because I think that this is going back
to what I said earlier, there's just no good
way for you to remove your prior biases from
whatever process of inquiry you try to carry out.
So the fact that for example, you've got nations
in favor of masks is inevitably going to lead
you to perform a sort of biased literature review.
And the chances are you'll end up just gathering
evidence that supports your, your initial view of the
situation. And the claim is not that you'll do
that consciously, right? The claim is that you're in
a sense, sort of kind of fool yourself into
thinking that you're doing an unbiased search. Whereas in
fact, you're doing a biased search, like an idea
I have in the book is what this shows
you is that at best, trying to be intellectually
autonomous is, is useless at worst. Actually, it's going
to lead you further away from the truth because
what you could do instead is rather than trying
to figure out the matter for yourself is you
could, well, you could, it's also you could do
something. It's rather that a better environment could be
constructed for you uh in which um there's less
need for you to uh to do these things
by yourself. So the idea in the book is
really that left their own devices, perhaps we'll try
to intellectual autonomous that will work out very well.
So really what would be required is an attempt
to engineer a situation where people don't need to
be. Um, WELL, people end up with the right
sorts of views, um, irrespective of what they do
as individual Inquirer. That sounds a little bit possibly
Orwell. And we can talk about that later anyway.
So the, the kind of shift in my thinking
that I've kind of come to more recently is
perhaps that is a little bit overstated. I think
probably they are going to be a wide range
of important cases where trying to be intellect autonomous
could actually be to your benefit. Perhaps in certain
situations, for example, in situations where there's a kind
of problem at the level of expertise, perhaps the
experts themselves are subject to a kind of group,
think there could be value in a kind of
intellectual autonomy. But the point I wanted to make
the book was really independent of all this. The
point was more just that we shouldn't be led
into the following mistake. Um JUST because it would
be good for an idealized Inquirer to strive to
be intellectually autonomous, doesn't mean that we should strive
intellectually autonomous because an idealized Inquirer is going to
lack the sorts of features such as susceptibility towards
various forms of bias. That mean that when we
try to intellectually autonomous, we end up making a
mess of it. So the point is if you
like kind of more almost conceptual, um it's kind
of natural if you have this kind of ideal
theory way of thinking to um to think that
intellectually autonomous, intellectual autonomy is important because it would
be important for an idealized Inquirer. But again, we're
not idealized Enquirer. Um So the argument isn't that
simple, what you'd have to do is show that
for actual inquirer in the actual situations that Inquirers
find themselves trying to be intellectually autonomous works out
well for them. Um So perhaps now I think
that that will happen more often than I give
the impression I do in the book. But the
point is still, that's what you would have to
show. OK. That made sense. That was quite
no, no, no, of course. I I just want
to ask you one or two follow ups to
it. So at a certain point there, you mentioned
the idea or touched on the idea of constructing
a better epistemic environment, but I I would like
to understand a little bit better. Uh If we
are operating under this non ideal epistemological framework, what
does it mean that to have a better epistemic
environment? What does it entail? Exactly,
right. Yeah. So I mean, let me put it
in a kind of abstract terms first, that will
help your audience get the idea. So let's imagine
the best of all possible epidemic worlds as it
were. So this is a world where there is
plentiful information to hand and that is genuine information.
So we can even imagine there's no misinformation out
there, right? So that all the information that you
get from all the sources that there are in
this perfect world, are giving out good genuine information.
So someone who lives in that world is going
to have a very easy time forming true beliefs,
right? They should literally pick up the first thing
they come across and that will give them a
bunch of true beliefs. And perhaps those aren't the
true beliefs they want. Perhaps this is true beliefs
about the nutritional properties of some new food stuff.
And they don't really care about that. Perhaps they
want to know about, perhaps they want to know,
perhaps they want to know about how uh nuclear
energy works, for example. Um So they don't really
care about uh nutrition. Uh But the point it
still stands that what they're going to get from
just picking up this bit of paper is lots
of genuine information. So, of course, we don't live
in that world, right. So that's not what our
world's like. There's um even if you disagree with
the authorities, but what is misinformation? You're still going
to agree that there's lots of misinformation out there.
It's just, you might think that what many regard
as misinformation is, is inaccurately labeled as such. Everyone's
going to agree that there's lots of misinformation out
there. So that makes it hard for us to
form true beliefs. And this is the point made
earlier. It's especially hard given that, you know, we're
not unbiased observers of this situation. We've got inclinations
one way or the other and that's going to
lead us to essentially focus on the bits of
information that support our our prior views. So constructing
a better epidemic environment, kind of very abstractly means
making our world more like this perfect world. Uh
That's that, that's what it would mean. So of
course, there's all sorts of enormous political questions about
how exactly you go about doing that. I think
in a wide range of cases, you might want
to discuss this becomes very difficult because obviously, there's
not going to be background agreement on what is
true in the first place. And if there's not
background agreement on what is true, there'll be disagreement
on what exactly making the environment better involves. And
that's perhaps one reason why I focus so much
on climate change as an example in the book
because, you know, obviously there is some disagreement, but
there really is very widespread disagreement amongst all the
relevant authorities that at the very least climate change
is real and is driven by human behavior. There's
disagreement about what to do about that fact. Um
EVEN at the kind of the level of the
relevant experts, um not so much about the the
fact that this is a human driven uh phenomenon.
So that to me kind of gives me a
kind of workable example of what constructing a better
environment would involve in the case of beliefs about
climate change, it would involve making it easier, essentially
people to access good genuine information about the climate
and harder for them to access misinformation. And that
doesn't necessarily mean censorship just, just to add, that
might mean for example, and this is actually what
the focus is on in the book, getting science
communicators to think more to think carefully about how
exactly they go about trying to get their message
across. Um So this is not about um uh
censoring uh the voices of skeptics rather, it's about
getting people that want to put across the, the
pro science message to think about how to do
that effectively. Um So that's not a point about
censorship or anything of that sort. That's more about,
you know, how can you go about uh convincing
people of these things that, that you think are
obviously true and um essentially in the book, that's
what I focus on. Uh SO far it's constructing
a better environment, uh is concerned. Answer the question.
Yes, I think that you've already answered this next
question, at least partly, but uh just to address
it directly. Now, uh one of the issues that
stems, I guess from the fact that we live
in this sort of imperfect epistemic environment is or
has to do with public ignorance about important political
and scientific issues. So how would you deal with
that then?
Yeah. So I think probably this is another place
where my thinking has moved on a little bit.
Uh FROM what I say in the book, not
in the sense that I disagree with anything I
say in the book, maybe just in the sense
that I would want to add something to it.
Um So I think the way to think about
public ignorance of important scientific issues as a kind
of political problem is to adopt a sort of
if you like pluralistic response to it. So what
you want to do essentially is um improve the
situation. So abstractly speaking, create an environment where we
have more true beliefs about the relevant issues. And
of course, there are various tools one could use
in order to go about doing that, people often
want to talk about education. So in this case,
we're talking about science education, they also want to
talk about public communication strategies. So here we're talking
about science communication strategies and then they want to
start to talk, you know, kind of more fine
grained about. But what exactly should these strategies look
like? So for example, in the education context, how
should we teach science? Should we teach it as
kind of a body of established facts? One kind
of question, should we do something a bit different?
Um If we do something a bit different, what
what should that be in the science communication context?
You know, so like should we again, should we
kind of focus single mindedly on getting our message
across or rather should we try to acknowledge certain
kinds of complexities, trusting to, to make up their
own minds. Um So in the book, I think
probably I adopt a slightly more myopic approach that
I would know. So I kind of, I, I
give the impression that roughly speaking, it's going to
be difficult to make a kind of balanced case
for certain scientific issues. So you should focus more
on thinking about how you frame your message in
the hope that that will make it easier for
that message to get acceptance. So that's kind of
going along the lines of maybe not trusting the
public quite as much as you might in order
to make sense of things, I think. No, probably
I would say it's a bit one sided perhaps
in certain situations. Um Actually fuller explanations are called
for. I know increasingly think that the pandemic is
a case in point here. So I think at
least certain bodies did try to adopt this sort
of information strategy where it was all very focused
on getting people to have the right beliefs. There
wasn't perhaps enough recognition of certain kinds of nuance
and complexity, perhaps counter factual. But it's possible to
me that if there had been more recognition of
certain kinds of complexities that might have actually improved
public uptake of certain health messages, again, that's speculation.
But to me, it doesn't seem crazy to think
that uh so yeah, so um to kind of
summarize all that uh public ignorance about science is
a complicated issue and I think it calls for
a sort of multi proned approach. Um I guess
the point I want to make and this is
one of the main points in the book is
that if you're approaching this as a problem, your
approach has to be as I put it in
the book, evidence based. Um So the question is
not what might work. The question is rather based
on the evidence that we have at our disposal,
what does seem to work? And those are the
sorts of strategies that you should focus on. And
of course, that kind of goes against the ways
in which philosophers have tended to approach these questions
where not always and certainly not nowadays, whether there
are other philosophers doing what I do. But you
know, at least in the recent past, the way
that philosophers would approach this problem would be more
akin to, to armchair speculation to put it slightly
provocatively,
right? So according to these non ideal epistemology framework,
what should be our obligations and responsibilities as Inquirer
or epistemic agents?
Yeah, good. So there's a nice simple answer to
this question uh which is that you can't answer
it in the abstract. So, so one of the
points I want to make in the book is
that um it's a mistake to think as I
think many logs seem to think that one can
actually talk about our epistemic responsibilities or obligations in
general, rather the right view to me seems to
be that, um, what your responsibilities and obligations actually
are, are going to depend on certain facts about
you. Um So for example, it might depend on
the sort of inquiry you're engaged in. Um, SO
think about different kinds of scientific inquiries, for example,
um, certain scientific inquiries call for a certain kind
of evidence, right? So perhaps you're doing a sort
of inquiry that calls for randomized control trials. Well,
then, you know, one of your responsibilities is to
conduct these randomized controlled trials, right? So other sorts
of evidence you might have are not really going
to be um germane to your inquiry. Um So,
so yeah, so as I said, it's not the
sort of question that I think on my view,
you can really answer in general rather what you
need to do is you need to think through
the different kinds of responsibilities you might have in
different situations.
Uh OK, so a more specific question then uh
do those situations include your social situation? Does that
also matter?
Well, indeed, yes. So let me, let me just
take a step back here and kind of talk
a little bit about why you might think that
it's important to engage with uh challenges to your
beliefs. So this is an idea that um is
often dated back to, to John Stuart Mill and
his various discussions in on liberty of the importance
of, of freedom of expression. And one thing that's
really interesting when you read Mill is it's quite
clear that he's not just saying that it's important
that people are allowed to air unorthodox views. I
mean, he thinks that, but he also thinks that
it's important that we listen to them and we
take them seriously that we engage with. So his
whole argument essentially is that it is only by
engaging with those who disagree with us that we
if you like earn the right to, to our
beliefs, so they kind of thought would be that
if you can't deal with these unorthodox views, there's
a sense in which you're not really justified in
having your belief, it might even become what Mill
called a dead dogma. So to me, this is
kind of an interesting perspective because it seems obvious
that there is something to it, right? So this
is one reason why Mills thought has been so
influential even hundreds of years, well, just over 100
years later. Um So there's definitely something to this
and I think the obvious thing to say in
response to the and in a way I'm saying
the obvious thing, it's just that, well, this kind
of goes too far, right? So the fact that
in certain situations, it seems clear that would indeed
be important to deal with this challenge to your
beliefs does not mean that you always should do.
So. So kind of following Mill, I think I
would suggest we should think about this in terms
of the consequences are likely consequences of engagement. So
Mill presumably is imagining a situation where the consequence
of engagement is, I guess either a recognition that
you were wrong in the first place, which is
good or a kind of better understanding of why
you're right in the first place, which is also
good. So for Mill, it, it's good either way.
Um So the point to me here, it's just
that, well, that's not always what's going to happen.
Um There are some situations where what's going to
happen is you end up being like a muddle,
like you're not really sure what to think. There'll
be some situations where you end up mistakenly concluding
that you were wrong when in fact, you were
right. And perhaps there'll be situations where you have
to kind of focus a little bit more on
the public consequences of having the debate. So it
could be that one of the bad consequences of
having the debate, is it misleads people in your
audience? So that's kind of, you know, programmatically various
ways in which the sort of engagement Mill was
championing can, can actually have adverse consequences. So, of
course, you know, if you want to defend, defend
Mill here, presumably you say something like this, that,
well, Mill wasn't claiming that in every single instance,
you would have beneficial engagement rather, he's claiming that
as a kind of general rule. Um YOU would
have beneficial engagement. But I think, you know, we
can go further here and say that, well, you
know, that's not quite right either because there are
certain kinds of situations where I think we can
say as a general rule, engagement is not going
to be beneficial. So one kind of situation is
one where this is a debate that we've had
many times before, right? So one reason why it's
not obvious what is gained by debating, for example,
to take the usual example, Holocaust Deniers is that
this debate has happened, right? There's a huge amount
of scholarly, scholarly literature documenting that the holocaust happened.
So to have a debate about it now uh
seems somewhat irrelevant because you can just point to
that literature. So the debate happened, uh that's why
there is this huge literature and there's no need
to go into it again. And
in that specific, let me just ask you in
that specific example, do you think that perhaps one
of the things people could worry about is that
if we keep on having that debate, it could
legitimate uh the question, I mean, it could legitimate
the conspiracy theory in that.
Well, indeed, yes, this is, this is what this
is why I said earlier, that one thing that
can happen as a consequence of having a debate
is as you put it uh legitimation of um
the the other side of that debate. Um BUT
just getting away from the Holocaust example, which I
just used, I think it was such an obvious
example to make my point. Here's a slightly less
obvious example perhaps. So I think we can say
as a kind of maybe not entirely general rule
but a rough and ready rule. Um DIFFERENT people
get different uh or experience. Um Sorry, uh we
can see it as a kind of rough and
ready rule that um the consequences of engaging the
debates are going to vary depending on who you
are. So, for example, if you are a well
spoken, well credentialed academic and you engage in a
debate with someone, then the chances are people are
going to be very impressed with, with your arguments.
Perhaps you're going to even impress yourself. There's very
little chance that in engaging with all sorts of
opponents in debate, you end up kind of misleading
yourself into thinking that you're wrong in the first
place. Actually, what's more likely to happen is that
you will end up congratulating yourself on how right
you were all along, things are different. If you
are someone who is along all sorts of dimensions
less secure, perhaps you've got genuine doubts in your
own position, engaging with all sorts of unorthodox challengers
could solidify those doubts. And that's a problem in
situations where perhaps you're wrong to have those doubts.
You know, it's kind of you, you're doubting that
you're right, but actually you very much are right.
So one example in the book that I, I
used to make this point is uh someone in
a workplace situation who thinks that they've faced um
uh discrimination because of their gender. Um So they
think this because, you know, they, they think they're
kind of fairly good at picking up on these
sorts of social cues. So they think that they've
definitely faced discrimination, but they have the natural sort
of doubts that someone in that situation might have
one consequence for this person of kind of taking
seriously all the men who line up to dispute
her interpretation of the situation is that she might
end up thinking, oh, she, she actually was wrong,
but of course, in many situations, she was right.
Um So these sorts of debates can knock your
confidence in a way that means that you, you
no longer have the belief that you started with.
And to me that's a kind of negative epidemic
consequence because you've gone from having a true belief
that you've kind of picked up based on your
reading of the various social cues to lacking that
true belief because you have engaged with all of
these challenges. And of course, you know, in real
life versions of this example, many of these challengers
have not entirely got pure motivations either, right? So
it's kind of a all sorts of explanations why
um people have, have sprung up to, to challenge
your interpretation of events. So that's a situation where
um someone has actually had a kind of net
epidemic loss from engaging in the sort of debate
that that Mill thinks um is always going to
be beneficial.
One or two more issues that you also explore
in the book. And I would like to address
here. So another one of the features of our
human psychology that is non ideal epistemological speaking is
motivated reasoning. So how would you deal with it?
Uh ACCORDING to your framework?
Yes, it's a, it's a good question, I guess
the first thing to say is that so I
said earlier that what non idealist technology means is
we have to recognize certain dimensions of non ideality
ways in which actual people depart from idealized versions
there of. So one of those dimensions is very
much a kind of susceptibility to various sorts of
cognitive biases. So kind of ways of misapprehending the
world, so to speak, it's motivated reasoning. It's not
quite a cognitive bias, but kind of roughly speaking,
you can call it a cognitive bias. So what
this refers to is the various ways in which
our thinking about the world is motivated by our
desire for the world to be a certain way.
So human beings are not dispassionate inquirer rather we
want certain things to be true. And that can
lead us to kind of constructive view of the
world that aligns with what we want to be
the case. And the important thing to say is
that this is meant to happen in various very
subtle ways. The idea is not that you kind
of simple mindedly put together this imagined version of
the world that fits with what you want the
world to be like. That's not psychologically realistic. Um
Rather what we do is through various means. We
sort of fool ourselves into um having an understanding
of, of things that is amenable to certain purposes
that we have and we're all familiar with this,
right? So, um, how do you go about having
a better impression of your friends moral qualities than
others would have not by kind of deciding to
think well of your friend, regardless of the evidence,
rather by gathering all the evidence that you need
to have a good impression of your friend's moral
qualities. So when asked about their moral character, you
will automatically call to mind good examples. So that
situation where they helped out someone in need as
opposed to bad examples, that situation where instead of
helping out someone in need, they were on a
fancy holiday, for example, um, you know, you can,
you construct the evidence in such a way that
you end up with, um, the sort of view
you want to have. And again, I want to
further thing to emphasize is in the psychology on
motivated reasoning. Um The idea is that we only
do this within certain limits, right? So we can't,
we can't have views of the world that are
completely at odds with the facts. Um So there
are certain limits. So for example, if your friend
is a truly awful person, the chances are on
some level you'll recognize that. So you can only
stretch the truth so much, but you can still
stretch the truth. So that's motivated reasoning. What implications
does that have for epistemology? Well, it makes you
ask all sorts of questions about, um, not just
whether our beliefs are rational or justified, but also
how to understand those beliefs in the first place.
So what does that raise questions about whether our
beliefs are justified? Well, kind of put simply if
it turns out that we kind of gather evidence
that is designed to support our favorite view of
the world, then that doesn't sound like a way
of, of forming justified beliefs, you know. So it's,
it's not that we kind of go out and
gather the evidence and then form the belief rather
we can have in a way, almost start with
the belief and then go looking for evidence to
support it. Um So the problem with that, of
course is that you might think that whatever you
started with, you'd find the evidence for. Um, SO
that seems to be kind of a way in
which our beliefs are in a certain sense unjustified.
And this also, at least to me makes me
ask questions about who understand beliefs in the first
place. So we do tend to think that beliefs
are the sorts of things that we form in
response to evidence. Right? So kind of, that's what
a belief is. It's a kind of evidence responsive
thing. This is the way that a lot of
philosophers like to talk. Um But if the literature
or motivated reasoning is to be believed, that's not
quite right. Um Beliefs are evidence responsive in the
sense I mentioned earlier that they can't be too
at odds with the evidence, but they're not necessarily
evidence responsive in the sense that they are formed
in response to the evidence. Again, rather, it might
be more like we, we go and gather the
evidence that we need to support the belief we
already have. Um So yeah, I mean, that to
me indicates that the motivated reasoning has got all
sorts of interesting epistemological implications that are worth thinking
through. And that's what I try to do in
the book.
And in regards to those implications, do you think
that keeping in mind all of what you said
there dealing with motivated reasoning, epistemological necessarily leads to
skepticism?
Well, first of all, no, but let me just
take a step back and say what we mean
by skepticism here. So, so in philosophy, uh certainly
in epistemology, when we talk about skepticism, usually people
assume we're talking about like Descartes skepticism. So the
kind of skepticism that says that we, we don't
know anything. So the skeptical problem in in technology
is usually taken to be what is called the
radical skeptical problem. The problem of how to show
that we know anything at all. So that's not
the sort of skepticism, that's the issue here because
there's nothing in the psychological literature or motivated reasoning
to support that sort of radical skepticism. Um So
the claim is not, for example, that we don't
know that the earth is flat or we don't
know that or I don't know that my hand
is in front of me. That's not the sorts
of beliefs where motivated reasoning is meant to play
much of a role precisely because these are not,
these are not the sort of beliefs that are
kind of relevant to our moral political identities in
any obvious way. Right? Um, WHEREAS, you know, uh
compare my belief that I've got a hand in
front of me with my belief that uh raising
taxes would be a good thing for the UK.
The second belief is very different to the first
and there's all sorts of ways in which I
might just go out and assemble evidence to support
that belief rather than taking kind of unbiased view
of the situation. None of that applies to my
belief that I've got a hand here. Right? I
just, I see it. I believe I've got a
hand, um, we're not talking about Descartes, kind of
skepticism. We're talking about a much more narrowly limited
sort of skepticism. It doesn't affect all of our
beliefs. But, and this is a crucial point, it
affects a lot of the beliefs that are most
important to us. Right? So, you know, moral political
beliefs, these are the beliefs that really matter. And
if it turns out that those are the beliefs
where perhaps we are, we are less rational than
we initially assumed that would I think, make for
at least a politically or morally interesting kind of
skepticism if not necessarily a kind of purely philosophically
interesting form. Um So your question though was does
dealing with motivated reasoning necessarily lead to that sort
of skepticism? And my answer to that is no,
it doesn't. Um I think it really depends on,
uh well, first of all, how you understand motivated
reasoning. And second of all, it's really going to
depend on you, right? So what I've said so
far is that humans have a tendency to kind
of conform their picture of certain parts of the
world to what they would like the world to
be like. But of course, people vary in terms
of this tendency. Um It could be that some
people are less prone to it than others. Um
It could be that even though there is an
element of bias in the way in which we
go about gathering evidence, um It's still the case
that we can have gathered enough evidence that our
beliefs are still justified by any reasonable view of
justification. Um So the point is not that there
is this ne necessarily this jump in the skepticism.
The point is just that it's possible. Um So
there's a kind of skeptical problem that we have
to take seriously if we start to think of
it motivated reasoning and just going back to radical
skepticism for a second. Um So people don't think
that radical skepticism is an interesting philosophical problem because
it's true. In fact, most philosophers think it's false.
Uh Many think is obviously false. It's an interesting
problem because Descartes skeptical scenarios uh pose a certain
kind of challenge to how we understand our knowledge
of the world. And the idea being, we have
to answer that challenge in order to be kind
of vindicated in thinking, we know what we think
we know. I wanna say the same thing here.
Um This stuff motivated reasoning poses a kind of
challenge to whether we have the sort of political
knowledge. For example, that we think we have a
rather politically relevant knowledge. Um That challenge perhaps can
be answered, but this is an interesting problem precisely
because we have to answer the challenge. Um So
yeah, that's the kind of way in which I'm
thinking about skepticism here, not as a necessarily as
a conclusion, more as a problem that is worth
thinking about.
Great. So I think that this is probably a
good point to wrap up the interview on and
the book is again, non ideal epistemology. I'm leaving
a link to it in the description of this
interview and Doctor mckenna, uh Robin just before we
go, would you like to tell people apart from
the book where they can find you with your
work on the internet?
Uh Well, I assume if you type my name
into Google, you'll find me. I've got a website,
uh, Robin mckenna.weeble.com, uh, not particularly good website. Um
If you look for Robert mckenna, you'll find my
University of Liverpool profile. Um I used to have
an active Twitter account, but I've tried to leave
Twitter behind to, to focus more on more uh
enjoyable things. Uh But yeah, look for me online.
You'll, you'll find me
great. So thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
fun to talk to you.
Thanks for the questions, Ricardo.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development, then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno, Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitten Bear. No Wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Condors,
Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and
H her meal and Lain Jung Y and the
Samuel K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel S
Friends. David Sloan Wilson. Ya dear, Roman Roach Diego,
Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte, Bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt,
Pavlo Stassi alek medicine, Gary G Alman Sam of
Zed YPJ Barboa, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner
Douglas Fry Franca, Beto Lati W Cortez or Solis
Scott Zachary FTD and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and
Peter Wo David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry
Dey Junior, Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radick, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory
Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert. Jessica. No week. Linda Brendan,
Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman,
Perras, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar,
Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Luca Toni, Tom Veg and
Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all.